As I said at the beginning of Mass,
today we celebrate Saint Joseph.
I’m sure many of you have a
devotion to him; I’m sure you also
have experiences—testimonies—of
his intercession.
But today, in this homily and reflection
on the Gospel, I would rather that
we come to understand a little
better Joseph’s role, and the part he
played in the history of salvation.
That’s why, when you read the
Gospels, the evangelists make a real
effort to emphasise that Joseph is
by origin from the house of David.
And then you’ll see in Luke’s Gospel it’s
mentioned six times, in Matthew’s four
times, and it’s very important to them
to stress that Joseph is of David’s line.
And if you listened carefully to
the Gospel… in the first sentence
it said: Joseph, son of Jacob.
Now we have “Joseph, son of Jacob”,
and then the Gospel ends with the
angel appearing and saying, “Joseph,
son of David.” So the angel himself
confirms that Joseph is of Davidic
origin, of the royal line of David.
Even though the Gospel says “son
of Jacob” right at the start, in
the very first sentence, the angel
stresses at the annunciation who he
is: that he is a son of David. You
can see that in Matthew’s Gospel.
Why was it so important to
emphasise that Jesus – and Joseph
too – were of Davidic descent?
Because… if we read the Old Testament,
we’ll see that the last great
bond God made, the last covenants
He established, were with whom?
With David.
He made them with David because the
Jewish people were expecting that chosen
one, that Messiah, who would establish
a kingdom, who would set His people free
and who, it says, would build the Temple.
But perhaps most important of all: that
He and the Father would be one, that
they would love one another so deeply.
And in the first reading we
heard, in 1 Samuel, that this
was expected in prophecy.
So that future king was meant to fulfil
those conditions: to establish a kingdom,
to build the Temple, to set the people
free – but most important of all, the sign
by which they would recognise him: that
he and the Son, the Son and the Father,
are one, that they love one another.
However, as we go on in the Old Testament,
we’ll see that God didn’t really
want David to establish the kingdom.
But his son, Solomon, would.
Yet David, as a true and good father
and king—devout and faithful to
the Law—did his utmost, and when
you read the Old Testament you’ll
see that he practically prepared
everything so that his son Solomon
could build the Temple in Jerusalem.
In fact, in the Old Testament you have
a detailed description of the materials
King David set aside for his son,
so that he could build the Temple in
Jerusalem more easily and more quickly.
So it describes there the
timber, the materials.
But it wasn’t granted to him, even
though he was so close to God, it wasn’t
granted to him to build the Temple.
Rather, that task was meant to be—
it was entrusted to his son Solomon.
But what’s the problem?
Although God wanted Solomon, David’s
son, to build that Temple, from what I
said about the prophecies that that king
was meant to have, Solomon didn’t have
one— and perhaps the most important: he
didn’t have a close relationship with God.
Even though he had the preparations,
and the building materials for
constructing the Temple, even though he
was given that trust and became king,
he didn’t have a close relationship
with God, and then it all fell apart.
And everything fell apart.
And of course the people then went
into crisis, asking themselves whether
that prophecy—that the Messiah would
come from the line of David—had already
been fulfilled and he had already come,
or whether he was still yet to come.
However, with the birth of Jesus,
the Jews began to realise that
part of those prophecies had been
fulfilled—partly, but not completely.
And so some believed that one
part of it, the promises, had been
fulfilled, and others did not.
And that’s why the evangelists
place such emphasis on Joseph’s
lineage, and why the angel says
that he is of the line of David.
That’s why, when you read the Gospel
– especially Matthew 1:1 – you get those
opening genealogies, where we sometimes
rather quickly lose track once we start
listening: so-and-so fathered so-and-so,
and so-and-so fathered so-and-so.
But in the Gospel, Matthew is trying to
underline precisely Jesus’ royal ancestry:
that he comes from the line of David.
That he comes out of that prophecy:
that a Messiah was to come, the one
who would build a temple that cannot
be destroyed, who would unite the
people, but most importantly, who
would be united with the Father.
And that is why, in the birth of
Jesus, and in Matthew’s Gospel,
the other evangelists emphasise
this very, very strongly: that the
Gospel is, after all, the Good News.
So that this prophecy hasn’t
been lost, but that it is
actually happening right now.
Now, what’s important here?
So, Joseph—look, Jesus has been born.
And now we come to what’s important
about Joseph’s and Jesus’ origins.
So Joseph and Jesus aren’t
of the royal family by blood.
And what mattered for inheritance in the
Old Testament was the law, not biology.
And by the law, since they fulfilled
it, David, Salmon, Joseph and
Jesus all come from the royal line.
At Christmas we always have
this image of the manger, of
poor little Jesus, but he isn’t.
It’s true he was born in a
stable, but he isn’t a nobody.
He is of royal lineage, the
future king who will establish an
indestructible temple and be a priest.
And that’s what’s important to emphasise:
Joseph is a member of the royal family
precisely through the keeping of the Law.
Let’s go back again to the Old
Testament, so we can better
understand some of these comparisons.
In theology, that Solomon, who had the
duty to build it all, that prophecy, that
image he was meant to create, is often
compared, of course, with Jesus’ kingdom.
And at that time, the temple was meant to
be built: Solomon was to build a temple.
He had twelve governors, a kind
of administration of the temple
and the kingdom, and in the temple
there were to be offered precisely
unbloody sacrifices: bread and wine.
And that is exactly what it
meant in Greek: the Eucharist.
Now, you see, David was not allowed
to build that temple, but his son was.
Yet because he was not faithful to God,
because he was not closely connected
with Him, it never actually came to pass.
But if we look at the analogy
of these events, we’ll notice
something rather striking.
We say of Joseph that he was a carpenter,
and even—let’s put it in simpler terms to
sum up all those trades—he was a builder.
Most likely Joseph, as a construction
worker, would have had certain materials.
He would certainly have had
wood if he was a carpenter.
He would certainly have had some sort
of workshop where he made those things.
And now we have King David, who prepared
everything for his son – all the materials
– for the building of that temple.
I believe Joseph likewise had something
he left to Jesus: an inheritance,
just as David left what was needed
for the building of that temple.
King David had his mother,
whose name was Bathsheba.
He brought her into the royal
court so that she could be his
adviser in certain situations.
Jesus takes Mary with him,
and in a way Joseph, too.
On the Cross, when Jesus died,
he left us his mother Mary,
just as David had Bathsheba.
On the other side of this prophetic
comparison, we see that, just as
David brought Bathsheba into his own
household and into the royal court,
so Jesus leaves his mother Mary to us.
It’s interesting to see how that
prophecy, which was meant to be fulfilled
in the Old Testament, was established
along that same royal line precisely
thanks to Joseph, who accepted God’s
family, so that God might build what
matters most: the indestructible temple.
All of us, Scripture says, are
temples of the Holy Spirit.
And together we make up one temple.
No matter that we’re scattered
across different cities, no
matter if this basilica were to
collapse, we are the living Church.
You know, I say here that the saddest
thing is to see a beautiful church
building with no people in it.
It’s better to celebrate Mass
on a sports stadium pitch with a
hundred people than in some empty
basilica, wherever it may be.
So we are the living Church.
And that is what God wanted: that an
indestructible temple should be built.
And that is what Jesus did.
First he allowed his body, as the
temple, to be destroyed, and he rose
again on the third day; and from
then on the living Church exists.
We, the limbs of Christ.
We who, through baptism, have
been grafted into him, and who
are, in a way, indestructible.
All of us today, when we reflect
on Saint Joseph and his role, we
all need both Joseph and Mary.
What is beautifully highlighted—and where
Solomon failed—is this: if I bring out
the Gospel and read the sentence again,
you would see that prophecy, how many
times Jesus says, “I and the Father are
one.” And in the first reading, that
is exactly what was asked of David’s
son, Solomon, and he did not keep it.
He was not one with the Father.
And Jesus always stresses that communion:
“I and the Father are one.” So we already
have prophecy fulfilled; we have the
temple of God established, one that can
no longer be brought down. And we already
know it has endured for 2,000 years.
Jesus says, “Not even the gates of hell
will prevail against it.” We have the
communion of the Father and the Son;
we have the Holy Spirit who, through
baptism, has grafted us into all of that.
And what’s interesting is
that Joseph’s role was to look
after and care for that family.
But do we need Joseph today,
do we need Mary today?
Do we need them?
I believe you’ve heard it – you’re
young, but you may still have heard your
parents say about someone else, “I’ve
provided everything for him.” Parents
often say that: “I’ve provided everything
for him, I’ve given him everything.”
You see, what is it, then, that parents
may sometimes have forgotten to give?
What is it… what did David – such an
outstanding father, steeped in wisdom, a
man of God – fail to give his son Solomon?
What is it that so many parents today
fail to give their children, and then,
in quotes, they say, “I’ve provided
everything for my child, I’ve given my
child everything”? What was it that Joseph
could give to Jesus? Even though Jesus
didn’t need it, because Jesus is God.
And do you know what he gave him?
He gave him a virtuous life.
That’s where David went
wrong with Solomon.
That’s why he didn’t fulfil God’s
prophecy and wasn’t one with the
Father as Jesus was, because in
a way he drifted away from God.
What good is it today if you give your
child everything, and they’ve moved away
from God—then they go off the rails, start
taking drugs, drinking, partying, driving
ridiculously expensive cars, killing
other people, and so on, and so on.
And then you asked yourself, “Where
did I make that mistake in bringing
them up?” Well, here’s where you
made it. You didn’t give them virtue.
You didn’t teach them,
in their upbringing, to…
He engraves it into himself, to accept the
virtues and the graces of the Holy Spirit.
That’s what I believe so many of our
young people are lacking: a virtuous life.
And I’m saying, Joseph certainly knew how
to give that to Jesus — even though Jesus
didn’t need it — but we need it today.
That’s why I asked the question: what are
we going to learn from Joseph today, apart
from just pestering him for our own needs?
Before we start pestering him with our
needs, let’s ask: is our life virtuous?
Those of you who are older and
have children—are you teaching
your children to live virtuously?
That’s an important message
for all of us today.
And I’d really like us to stop treating
Saint Joseph the way we do Saint
Anthony—just using him as a means to
an end and telling little stories.
Of course these are tremendous
testimonies, and they’re such great saints
who are, naturally, our intercessors.
But sometimes I get the feeling
that with certain things we
end up being a bit superficial.
We’ve just explained that
Joseph is of a royal family.
Jesus too is of a royal family.
That’s a big thing.
We are baptised, and then we have
no right to say that we’re not
somebody, that we’re not important.
Yes, because we too are baptised,
part of the royal family.
Do you understand that?
So we are part of this story as well,
because you are grafted into Jesus.
And what’s interesting about Saint
Joseph, what we can see, is that even
if he knew he was of royal lineage, he
lived humbly, he lived in poverty, he
lived in silence, quietly, without fuss.
He knew how to live out
that royal dignity of his.
That would be wonderful if we Christians
knew how, in the silence of our hearts,
to carry that pride and live out
the dignity of being God’s children.
No matter what anyone thinks of me,
how others see me, I am somebody;
I’m not an accident in this world.
I am part of a royal family; someone
paid dearly for me with blood.
Someone planned this whole history,
the history of the ages—through
the prophets, through the inspired
words of the evangelists—right up
to Jesus, so that today I could
be a member, a part of that story.
And we ought to be happy; all
of us here should, right now,
have crowns on our heads.
Not bishops’ mitres—royal ones.
Don’t think I’m going mad.
I’ve said I’d turn down a bishop’s post
because of my hairstyle, so don’t worry.
What matters is that we
actually feel that way too.
And especially for men: Saint Joseph
is both a protector and the one who
inspires, helps, and gives strength.
However, what stands out about Saint
Joseph is his silence: he didn’t
lead noisily, and in that silence
he was able to hear God’s voice.
Just imagine that situation: an
angel appears to you and gives
you such a huge task — that you
are to care for the Son of God.
Of course he was confused.
Come on, lads, how many of you have
found yourselves in that kind of
situation — how many times have you
had difficult decisions in life, when
you were afraid and confused as well?
And of course, if you’re making
serious decisions, or if God has
entrusted you with a task — and
especially you who are going to get
married, and you who are already
married — you have to take up your role.
Do you know how sad and tragic it is?
When I say a man should take up his role,
I don’t mean he should be some brute.
Because the Gospel says that the man
should be the head of the family.
Unfortunately, sometimes
men misunderstand that.
It doesn’t mean being the head of
the family so you can bully others
and be the boss of the house.
No — the opposite.
The opposite.
If we look at the life of Saint
Joseph, and if he’s been given
to men as a model, then the first
thing he does is in silence.
First, he doesn’t listen to his wife
or the child — he doesn’t listen
to his wife or the child first.
Constantly with God.
Now get up, now set off.
Now go there, now go here.
That’s what men need: to calm down
a bit and, whatever decisions and
whatever awaits you in life, first
to stop with God, to have a word
with him, to hear where he’s sending
you, what you need to do, and to have
that trust in God—to be a man of God.
And you know how that then shows itself
in the family, towards the other members
of the family, towards your wife and
towards your children: because then you
have to be an authority—on the one hand
a firm rock, and on the other hand,
gentleness, kindness, and goodness.
But you’ve got to be the one
who takes the initiative.
The one who leads.
It’s sad today, seeing how
many men have lost their way.
They don’t know where they’re
going, or who’s leading them.
When the woman has to be the one making
the decisions at home—what’s going
to happen and how it’s going to be.
This has nothing to do with the
feminist movement; I’m saying
everything’s got completely muddled up.
So I don’t really know any more what’s
what with the family — chaos, chaos.
But I’ve got this feeling, and it’s a
good thing, that I’m noticing you young
people are searching for that identity.
Look, a brilliant example is Saint Joseph.
Brilliant.
Believe me, you won’t lose any part
of yourself if you become a bit
quieter, and act from inner strength.
Because if you’re in a relationship
with God, you gain that inner
confidence — and your girlfriend,
and your wife, will feel it in you.
When a man doesn’t have that
inner confidence, it’s a disaster.
Then everyone’s disorientated: him, his
wife, the children, the whole family.
That’s why a man can’t
afford to be disorientated.
And he becomes disorientated
when he doesn’t listen to God.
Because then you’re just lashing out and
going wherever a hundred other voices
tell you: the family says one thing,
the wife another, the kids another, the
boss another, this, that, and the rest.
No.
Decide who you’re going to listen to.
Entrust your life to God first.
You’ve got husbands, you’ve got men
who are constantly praying to God
for their wife, for their children.
Mate, pray for yourself first.
Because you’re the locomotive.
You’re the locomotive.
And you women too—stop criticising men.
Better to pray a novena
to a saint for him.
Why?
That’s why I say it’s really important:
if the head of the family rushes in
blindly, everyone rushes in blindly.
General chaos follows.
Because if we started picking families
apart again, we’d end up poking our
noses into other people’s business.
But I believe you don’t need to be afraid.
Look at how many challenges Joseph
and Mary, as the Holy Family, had:
uncertainty, fear, enemies, constantly
being uprooted and moved about.
Just imagine it — with a small child
you’re going, walking, travelling; as many
challenges as you could possibly want.
How immense must that
trust in God have been?
And what about us today?
We want everything to be certain.
You won’t get married, you won’t do this,
you won’t move out from your parents
because you don’t know how you’ll manage.
You won’t marry because you
don’t know what’s coming, you
haven’t got a secure future, you
haven’t bought a house or a car.
We want everything guaranteed — but where,
then, is our communication with God?
Yesterday I preached about the word that
kills you, and why you don’t do many good
things – and that word is hesitation.
And when we hesitate, we
stop doing God’s will.
Because if God knows something is
good for you, and he urges you on…
Now imagine this: the angel of the
Lord comes to Joseph and says, “Get
up, take Mary…” and Joseph says, “Oh
dear, I need a bit more information.
Come back a few more times, will you?
So I can work out how and what,
and get my head round it.”
Imagine if he had acted like that.
And we hesitate—what do we do?
We don’t have faith and trust in God;
instead we gather information to make
ourselves feel safer, to calculate as
securely as possible whether we’re going
to risk anything, and what might happen.
And that hesitation—we can even
dress it up as something pious.
Then we say it’s sensible to think
it through, that we need to look
at it wisely, but in fact what’s
hiding behind it is unbelief.
And every postponement, every hesitation
in response to God’s prompting, is
you showing disobedience to God.
And you can see here, through this
whole homily and the interpretation
of these readings tonight, just
how important obedience to God was.
Because you will never gain
clarity while you sit and wait.
Nor will God ever give it.
Look—Saint Joseph is an example: he
didn’t have complete clarity either.
And last night I was listing other saints.
They didn’t have it either.
Moses didn’t have complete clarity;
it was simply, “Get up and set off for
the Promised Land.” And Saint Paul—when
Jesus said to him, “Come out onto the
water, walk on the water towards me,” he
didn’t say, “Wait, I might sink; I’m not
completely sure I can walk.” So what is
it that happens in God’s way of teaching?
We gain certainty and clarity
only once we set off on the path.
On the path.
That’s why I’m encouraging you.
It’s better to take the risk,
because you’re all afraid of
making a mistake, of risking.
And believe me, it’s a lesser sin
to take a risk and get it wrong
than to hesitate and do nothing.
Because why, in the Gospel, did
they go after the one who received a
single talent—what sin did he commit?
He didn’t do anything.
That’s what he did wrong: he hid
the talent he was given, buried
it, and did nothing with it.
And while you hesitate, a day goes by,
a month goes by, three go by, and we
never make certain decisions—yet God
has destined you for the struggle.
God has given you a task,
to entrust something to you.
If he entrusted his Son to Joseph, if
he entrusted Mary to Joseph to care for…
I believe that God has given each and
every one of us a mission, a person,
a role in life; He has faith in us.
That’s why we mustn’t hesitate.
That’s why Saint Joseph is
an example for us: he didn’t
have everything crystal clear.
Get going.
And let’s stop, I’m saying, hiding
behind those words with all those…
patterns, excuses: “I think it’s wise
to wait a bit, I think it’s wise to
think it through, I don’t think I
should rush into it, I don’t think I’m
a hundred per cent sure,” and so on.
So, imagine this: from a single sentence
Joseph has to know this and that.
When someone comes to you from heaven
to tell you, and now the angel says,
“You will see Jesus,” and so on.
But how are you to bring him up,
care for him, and everything else?
Yet from Joseph’s example we see that
if you are God’s man, if you listen to
Him, God will make what’s needed happen.
And I find it quite fitting that at
Christmas we spend a bit more time with
this theme of the Holy Family; I’ve always
found it close to my heart, because that’s
genuinely how it is in the spiritual life.
They always escaped a dangerous
situation—like people say—by
the skin of their teeth.
But it wasn’t really that they
escaped; it was God’s providence.
It never happened to them that, say,
when they wanted to kill all the
little children, the angel would come:
“Take the child, run, so they don’t…”
So everything was always by a hair’s
breadth. And we too, if we’re Christian
believers, have to get used to that.
If we belong to God, we have trust.
Believe me, God won’t sort things
out months in advance, or days
in advance, just so we feel safe.
It’ll always be right on the edge.
Always right on the edge.
I’ve been shocked more than once
by God’s intervention: when you
think everything’s closed off, that
something’s impossible to sort out.
And then, all of a sudden, God sorts
it out at the very last moment.
So, a bit of adventure, people – come
on, throw yourselves into it.
Look, since I hadn’t prepared a
sermon, I asked the altar servers
whether anyone had more experience
of St Joseph’s intercession.
And one lad said he did, so please,
could you come up for a moment – just
briefly to give your testimony – so
it’s not just me retelling it
when he’s already here present.
Go on, go on.
Well, there you go — thank you, Marija.
I believe many of you have been
praying the novena to Saint Joseph
that’s just finished yesterday.
So, over those nine weeks, I was sort
of praying the novena to Saint Joseph
together with my girlfriend, so that I’d
get a job in construction — and today, on
Saint Joseph’s Day, I signed the contract.
So, just keep praying.
You heard him say: fiancée,
job — so how could it not be
worth praying to Saint Joseph?
The man got everything.